# useContext: simple Counter

## 📝 Your Notes

Prop Drilling -- AKA threading. Required when "lifting state"
Prop drilling is simply when you have to drill (or 'thread') props through one component to get them to another component.

### Why is prop drilling good?
In an application that uses global variables, answering the question "can I modify/delete this code without breaking anything?" is difficult to answer. And that's the question you should be optimizing for as you code.

The good thing about prop drilling is that if you need to make a change to a prop, you can easily track all the places the prop is being used, without having to run it, and make your changes. Explicit, not implicit.

### What problems can prop drillihng cause?
It can be a pain when refactoring if you need to drill through many layers of components.

### How can we avoid problems with prop drilling?
One thing that aggrevcates these types of issues is breaking out your `render` method into too many different components unncessarily.

Don't break things out prematurely. Wait until you really need to reuse a block before breaking it out.

When you experience a PROBLEM, THEN you can abstract/break your component into multiple components. Not before.

### Context
We can also avoid the pain of prop drilling in certain scenarios by inserting some state into a section of our React tree, and then extract that state anywhere within that React tree without having to explicitly pass it everywhere. This is called `context`

This is similar to global variables, but it doesn't suffer from the same problems due to how the API makes the relationships explicit.

Example:
```javascript
import * as React from 'react'

const FooContext = React.createContext()

function FooDisplay() {
  const foo = React.useContext(FooContext)
    return <div>Foo is: {foo}</div>
  }

  ReactDOM.render(
    <FooContext.Provider value="I am foo">
        <FooDisplay />
    </FooContext.Provider>,
    document.getElementById('root'),
  )
```

Note that React's composition model may be a better way to avoid issues with Prop Drilling

By this, he means passing children to a parent component and just having that parent render the children, so you can pass the prop to the child directly.

### When to use Context
Context is designed to share data that can be considered global for a tree of React components, such as the current authenticated user, theme, or preferred language.


Another cool way to avoid prop drilling, from the docs, is to pass down the component itself as a prop, rather than the multiple props that component needs.

Example:
```javascript
function Page(props) {
  const user = props.user;
  const userLink = (
    <Link href={user.permalink}>
      <Avatar user={user} size={props.avatarSize} />
    </Link>
  );
  return <PageLayout userLink={userLink} />;
}

// Now, we have:
<Page user={user} avatarSize={avatarSize} />
// ... which renders ...
<PageLayout userLink={...} />
// ... which renders ...
<NavigationBar userLink={...} />
// ... which renders ...
{props.userLink}
```

Keep your context values scoped to the area that needs it. Don't make it globally available for no reason like most devs.



## Background

Sharing state between components is a common problem. The best solution for this
is to 📜 [lift your state](https://reactjs.org/docs/lifting-state-up.html). This
requires 📜 [prop drilling](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) which is
not a problem, but there are some times where prop drilling can cause a real
pain.

To avoid this pain, we can insert some state into a section of our react tree,
and then extract that state anywhere within that react tree without having to
explicitly pass it everywhere. This feature is called `context`. In some ways
it's like global variables, but it doesn't suffer from the same problems (and
maintainability nightmares) of global variables thanks to how the API works to
make the relationships explicit.

Here's how you use context:

```javascript
import * as React from 'react'

const FooContext = React.createContext()

function FooDisplay() {
  const foo = React.useContext(FooContext)
  return <div>Foo is: {foo}</div>
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <FooContext.Provider value="I am foo">
    <FooDisplay />
  </FooContext.Provider>,
  document.getElementById('root'),
)
// renders <div>Foo is: I am foo</div>
```

`<FooDisplay />` could appear anywhere in the render tree, and it will have
access to the `value` which is passed by the `FooContext.Provider` component.

Note that as a first argument to `createContext`, you can provide a default
value which React will use in the event someone calls `useContext` with your
context, when no value has been provided:

```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<FooDisplay />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

Most of the time, I don't recommend using a default value because it's probably
a mistake to try and use context outside a provider, so in our exercise I'll
show you how to avoid that from happening.

🦉 Keep in mind that while context makes sharing state easy, it's not the only
solution to Prop Drilling pains and it's not necessarily the best solution
either. React's composition model is powerful and can be used to avoid issues
with prop drilling as well. Learn more about this from
[Michael Jackson on Twitter](https://twitter.com/mjackson/status/1195495535483817984)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/03.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.js)

We're putting everything in one file to keep things simple, but I've labeled
things a bit so you know that typically your context provider will be placed in
a different file and expose the provider component itself as well as the custom
hook to access the context value.

We're going to take the Count component that we had before and separate the
button from the count display. We need to access both the `count` state as well
as the `setCount` updater in these different components which live in different
parts of the tree. Normally lifting state up would be the way to solve this
trivial problem, but this is a contrived example so you can focus on learning
how to use context.

Your job is to fill in the `CountProvider` function component so that the app
works and the tests pass.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 create a consumer hook

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.extra-1.js)

Imagine what would happen if someone tried to consume your context value without
using your context provider. For example, as mentioned above when discussing the
default value:

```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<FooDisplay />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

If you don't provide a default context value, that would render
`<div>Foo is: </div>`. This is because the context value would be `undefined`.
In real-world scenarios, having an unexpected `undefined` value can result in
errors that can be difficult to debug.

In this extra credit, you need to create a custom hook that I can use like this:

```javascript
const [count, setCount] = useCount()
```

And if you change the `App` to this:

```javascript
function App() {
  return (
    <div>
      <CountDisplay />
      <Counter />
    </div>
  )
}
```

It should throw an error indicating that `useCount` must be used within a
CountProvider.

### 2. 💯 caching in a context provider

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.extra-2.js)

Let's try the last exercise over again with a bit more of a complex/practical
example. That's right! We're back to the Pokemon info app! This time it has
caching in place which is cool. So if you enter the same pokemon information,
it's cached so it loads instantaneously.

However, we have a requirement that we want to list all the cached pokemon in
another part of the app, so we're going to use context to store the cache. This
way both parts of the app which need access to the pokemon cache will have
access.

Because this is hard to describe in words (and because it's a completely
separate example), there's a starting point for you in
`./src/exercise/03.extra-2.js`.

## 🦉 Other notes

`Context` also has the unique ability to be scoped to a specific section of the
React component tree. A common mistake of context (and generally any
"application" state) is to make it globally available anywhere in your
application when it's actually only needed to be available in a part of the app
(like a single page). Keeping a context value scoped to the area that needs it
most has improved performance and maintainability characteristics.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=03%3A%20useContext%3A%20simple%20Counter&em=).
